# Steering committee meeting notes: July 8, 2020

**When**: July 8, 2020

**Attendees**:

- Ashwanth Kumar
- Birgitta Boeckeler
- Ketan Padegaonkar
- Mark Crossfield
- Tomasz Sętkowski
- Aravind SV (coordination)

## Notes:

### Introductions


### Sharing context:

  - Currently, the GoCD team is small and will be around till the end of the year to make sure support contracts are honoured.

  - They are working on quite a few big things: Cleanup of code, trying to remove Rails as a dependency, improving user experience and trying to make the code maintainable by a smaller, less cohesive team.

  - From a legal standpoint: If ownership needs to be changed, it can be. All contributors have signed a Contributor License Agreement which should allow that to happen.

  - Existing user base:
    - Didn't do much active tracking -- so it is hard to say much about the user base. We did get an idea based on update checks, etc. but even that could be turned off by users.
    - What we know about the user base, we know from talking to people, to understand their challenges etc.
    - As far as we know there are small teams and large organisations continuing to use it.
    - With larger organisations, it's a little harder for them to make a change in a CD tool quickly, but if they have set themselves up in ways that we encouraged (such as maintaining scripts etc), it should be easier to move.

  - Ex-customers of GoCD's commercial support:
    - There is a mix. Some feel confident about managing their own setups, some were worried about the fact that there was no support offering and some who asked whether there are other organisations willing to take over support capability.
    - Taking over support is challenging due to the knowledge required. It's a big codebase developed over many years. It's in better shape than comparable codebases but it still has a lot of history.
    - There is a person who has been talking about branching out and providing an offering but I have no more information about it.
    - Anecdotally: Not many ex-customers have moved away yet, waiting to see what comes out of this effort (committee). They will likely want to use something which is supported.
    - There is a move towards SaaS still going on in the CD space and that seems to be preferred by end users/admins.
    - Some ex-customers were happy that the commercial plugins were open-sourced.

  - Potential challenges:
    1. Development contributors: There are a few who have said they would like to help with technical steering. However there aren't many people (almost none) who took the time to understand the codebase deeply and contribute. It was attempted, but it is a challenge in many open-source projects to get long-term continued contributions.
        - There are people who do drive by changes (make an improvement but not stick around).
        -  There are others who maintain plugins -- much more than work on the core of GoCD.
    2. Infrastructure for building, testing and maintaining the GoCD codebase: It is unclear where the funding will come for it, and that's something we need to think about as a part of this committee.


### Discussions:

  - Question: Approximately how many organisations are using GoCD?

    Not sure about the number of organisations, but we knew of about 2000 instances of GoCD pinging us for update checks (remember that it could be turned off as well). These could be small or big instances. We know of organisations which have 9000 pipelines across instances, and different organisations which have 4000 pipelines on a single instance. There are smaller teams which have one project on it as well.

  - Question: Has a managed platform (SaaS) ever been considered for GoCD?

    Yes, it has. We also had some previous experience offering CD as a service (SnapCI) and we learned a lot from that. The kind of organisation that SnapCI was positioned towards is completely different since that was for smaller teams and GoCD comes into its own with larger, more complex setups.

     A managed platform is challenging for many reasons:

      - It needs support across all timezones for 24-hours support.

      - GoCD wasn't really made for that kind of a service. It wasn't made to be multi-tenant, and we weren't sure it would be worth the time to go there.

      - In the CD space, it's kind of a race to the bottom. You need deep pockets.

  - Thought: We are empowered to think about the perception of this move. Making it part of a foundation or an open-source project with its own life might be equivalent to having a company behind it. We should be thinking about how to build the confidence that this project can govern itself from now on. There are bigger organisations with enough engineering capability to build their own features if they want. As long as people know that there is a sufficient community, sufficient documentation to get past problems they face, then they might see value in using GoCD.

  - Thought: Moving CI systems is challenging and there is a lot of cost involved in it.

  - Thought: The reality right now: Companies (especially big enterprises) tend to use one build server technology to get benefits from economies of scale. This can cause issues if multiple teams are using the same server (having to wait for others' runs using up agents). If you have different setups, it could be different servers. However, the reality is that there is one technology they depend on and it's a huge effort to move away.


### Discussion about next steps and about whether there are learnings from other similar situations:

- Thought: I haven't been personally involved but know of projects which have been donated to foundations. For example, Spark which started in a university before being donated to Apache foundation and became big from there. However, there are counter-examples such as Wave and Dataflow which were donated to Apache but went nowhere. So, we might have to look at other projects in its space -- maybe Spark became big because it came up at a time big data was booming in the world at that time -- maybe it wouldn't happen the same way today. So, we might need to do more research.

- Thought: Was running an open-source tool which moved to the Eclipse foundation. Once that happened, the amount of engagement, the visibility, the community that got built around it was an interesting perspective. Though I see and understand that it is not true for all projects -- it depends on the community you build.

- We need more information about how the different foundations work and an overview of them.

- **ACTION ITEM**: Research how foundations work + who we can talk to, to learn more about them.

- **ACTION ITEM**: Would be good to have a one-pager or overview of information about the numbers regarding the project (regarding contributions, user-base etc). Whenever we recommend something (as mentioned in the charter), whoever we recommend that to will ask something similar. Even if we don't know some parts of it.


### Discussion about: Collaboration (More offline? Or mainly during our meetings?)

- Thought: Decided that having a bit of a pre-read would be nice, but we need to make sure we have all the conversations during the committee meetings.

- Thought: Email doesn’t work well -- could we use something more asynchronous?

- **ACTION ITEM**: Also, set up a Slack instance to help with communication.


### Discussion about: Cadence of committee meetings

- Thought: If we have an agenda, we should meet. If not, we shouldn't.

- Thought: It's good to have a cadence in the calendar, so that we have a touchpoint to decide whether there is something to discuss or not. Helps with urgency, in case we end up cancelling a meeting for lack of progress.

- **ACTION ITEM**: Set up time in everyone’s calendar.


### Discussion about: Next steps

- For next time: Maybe use a workshop mode to help think about the next steps. It could be foundations, or leaving it on GitHub or Gitlab. But, how do we decide what to go with -- and what is the best foundation to help target? A workshop style approach might be good.

- Timeline for this work: We don’t need to hurry it unnecessarily, but the team is around till the end of the year and if we need any help, we can get it. So, it would be nice to finish it (latest) by that time.
